README.md, before:

![Stately.js Logo](https://github.com/fschaefer/Stately.js/raw/master/misc/Stately.js.png)

## What is it?

Stately.js is a JavaScript based finite-state machine (FSM) engine for Node.js
and the browser.

## Installation

In Node.js you can install Stately.js with `npm`:

    $ npm install stately.js

and include it to your project by:

```js
var Stately = require('stately.js');
```

In browsers you can include it directly by adding it to the document head section:

```html
<script type="text/javascript" src="https://raw.github.com/fschaefer/Stately.js/master/Stately.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">
    // use Stately
</script>
```

or with Asynchronous Module Definition by e.g.:

```html
<script type="text/javascript" src="https://raw.github.com/jrburke/requirejs/master/require.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">
require(['https://raw.github.com/fschaefer/Stately.js/master/Stately.js'], function (Stately) {
    // use Stately
});
</script>
```

## Usage

### Creating a new machine

A new state machine can be created with either the new operator:

```js
var machine = new Stately(statesObject, initialStateName);
```

or the factory method:

```js
var machine = Stately.machine(statesObject, initialStateName);
```

Both will return a new `stateMachine` object, with all events from all states
attached to it. The machine will transition into the initial state `initialStateName`
 or the first attached `stateObject` if `initialStateName` is omitted. In addition
to the events the `stateMachine` object has a `getMachineState()` method, returning
the current name of the machines state, `getMachineEvents()`, returning possible
events in the current state, and `bind()` and `unbind()` methods, to register
callbacks to receive `notifications` when the machine transitions into another state.

The `statesObject` is an object  with `stateObject` objects attached as
properties.
The property names of the `statesObject` are the `states` of the machine.
The attached `stateObject` objects model the machines states with the property
names as `events` and the connected functions as `actions`:

```js
var machine = Stately.machine({
    'STATE0': {
        event: function () {
            ...
        }
    },
    'STATE1': {
        event: function () {
            ...
        }
    },
    'STATE2':{
        event: function () {
            ...
        },
        anotherEvent: function () {
            ...
        }
    }
});
```

If different states use the same event identifier, the `events` are chained up
and the machine handles calling the correct `action` for the current state (if
the `event` is handled in the current state). If the event is not handled in
the current state, it is ignored.

If no immediate `action` needs to be declared, the desired transition `state`
can be attached to the `event` as string directly:

```js
var machine = Stately.machine({
    'STATE0': {
        'event':        /* => */ 'STATE1'
    },
    'STATE1': {
        'event':        /* => */ 'STATE2'
    },
    'STATE2': {
        'event':        /* => */ 'STATE0',
        'anotherEvent': /* => */ 'STATE1'
    }
});
```

### Transitions

There are several ways an `action` can transition the machine into another
state. The simplest form is returning the desired next state from an action.
Therefore, `this` refers to the (internal) `stateStore` inside an `action` to
access the other states of the machine:

```js
...

'STATE1': {
    doSomething: function () {

        ...

        //transition from STATE1 to STATE2
        return this.STATE2;
        // as an alternative just return the new state as string
        // return 'STATE2';
    }
}

...
```

If an action should not transition the machine into another state, just omit
the return value (or return the current state).

Sometimes it is desired to return a value from an action. In this case the
return value must be an array with two elements. The first element is the next
state the machine should transition into, and the second element the return
value:

```js
...

'STATE1': {
    doSomething: function () {

        ...

        //transition from STATE1 to STATE2 and return a string
        return [this.STATE2, 'this is a return value'];
    }
}

...
```

For asynchronous actions there are `getMachineState()` and
`setMachineState(nextState)` accessible through the `this` reference of an
action:

```js
...

'STATE1': {
    doSomething: function () {
        var self = this;

        setTimeout(function () {

            ...

            self.setMachineState(self.STATE2);
        }, 5000);

        ...

    }
}

...
```

Because `this` refers to the `stateStore`, it is also possible to call an
action from another state (note: this won't trigger the `notification`
callbacks):

```js
...

'STATE1': {
    doSomething: function () {

        ...

        this.STATE2.doSomethingDifferent.call(this);

        ...

        return this.STATE3.doSomethingCompletelyDifferent.call(this);
    }
}

...
```

### Notifications

Once in a while, it is useful to get a `notification` when the machine
transitions into another state. Therefore the `stateMachine` object has
`bind(callback)` and `unbind(callback)` to register and unregister notification
handlers that get called when the state changes. A notification callback has
the following form:

```js
function notification (event, oldState, newState) {
    ...
}
```

`event` - The event that triggered the transition.
`oldState` - The old state the machine is transitioned from.
`newState` - The new state the machine is transitioned into.

Inside the `notification`, `this` refers to the internal `stateStore`.

### Hooks

Beside the notification system via `bind` and `unbind`, there is an alternative
way to attach hooks that are triggered when the state of the machine changes.
Possible hooks are `onbeforeSTATE`, `onenterSTATE` (or as shortcut `onSTATE`)
and `onleaveSTATE` for states and `onbeforeEVENT` and `onafterEVENT` for
events. Hook functions have the same signature as notifications bound with
`bind`.

## Examples

### Door

```js
var door = Stately.machine({
    'OPEN': {
        'close':  /* => */ 'CLOSED'
    },
    'CLOSED': {
        'open':   /* => */ 'OPEN',
        'lock':   /* => */ 'LOCKED'
    },
    'LOCKED': {
        'unlock': /* => */ 'CLOSED',
        'break':  /* => */ 'BROKEN'
    },
    'BROKEN': {
        'fix': function () {
            this.fixed = (this.fixed === undefined ? 1 : ++this.fixed);
            return this.fixed < 3 ? this.OPEN : this.BROKEN;
        }
    }
});

//the initial state of the door is open (it's the first state object)
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'OPEN');        // true;

//close and lock the door
door.close().lock();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'LOCKED');      // true;

//try to open it
door.open();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'OPEN');        // false;

//unlock, open, lock (is ignored because it fails), close, and lock
door.unlock().open().lock().close().lock();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'LOCKED');      // true;

//the door is still locked, break it
door.break();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'BROKEN');      // true;

//fix opens the door, close it, lock it, break it again
door.fix().close().lock().break();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'BROKEN');      // true;

//and again fix opens the door, close it, lock it, break it
door.fix().close().lock().break();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'BROKEN');      // true;

//fixing is limited, the door stays broken
door.fix();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'OPEN');        // false;
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'BROKEN');      // true;
```

### Radio

```js
var radio = Stately.machine({
    'STOPPED': {
        play: function () {
            return this.PLAYING;
        }
    },
    'PLAYING': {
        stop: function () {
            return this.STOPPED;
        },
        pause: function () {
            return this.PAUSED;
        }
    },
    'PAUSED': {
        play: function () {
            return this.PLAYING;
        },
        stop: function () {
            return this.STOPPED;
        }
    }
}).bind(function (event, oldState, newState) {

    var transition = oldState + ' => ' + newState;

    switch (transition) {
        /*
        ...
        case 'STOPPED => PLAYING':
        case 'PLAYING => PAUSED':
        ...
        */
        default:
            console.log(transition);
            break;
    }
});

radio.play().pause().play().pause().stop();
//STOPPED => PLAYING
//PLAYING => PAUSED
//PAUSED => PLAYING
//PLAYING => PAUSED
//PAUSED => STOPPED
```

### Radio (more declarative)

```js
var radio = Stately.machine({
    'STOPPED': {
        'play': /* => */ 'PLAYING'
    },
    'PLAYING': {
        'stop':  /* => */ 'STOPPED',
        'pause': /* => */ 'PAUSED'
    },
    'PAUSED': {
        'play': /* => */ 'PLAYING',
        'stop': /* => */ 'STOPPED'
    }
});

radio.onleaveSTOPPED = function (event, oldState, newState) {
    // ...
};

radio.onenterSTOPPED = function (event, oldState, newState) {
    // ...
};

radio.onPLAYING = function (event, oldState, newState) {
    // ...
};

radio.onPAUSED = function (event, oldState, newState) {
    // ...
};
```

## jsFiddles
* http://jsfiddle.net/sz2hG/

Commit message:

Add bower installation note
It is case-sensitive in bower installation.

README.md, after:

![Stately.js Logo](https://github.com/fschaefer/Stately.js/raw/master/misc/Stately.js.png)

## What is it?

Stately.js is a JavaScript based finite-state machine (FSM) engine for Node.js
and the browser.

## Installation

In Node.js you can install Stately.js with `npm`:

    $ npm install stately.js

and include it to your project by:

```js
var Stately = require('stately.js');
```

Alternately, you can install Stately.js with `bower`:

    $ bower install --save Stately.js

In browsers you can include it directly by adding it to the document head section:

```html
<script type="text/javascript" src="https://raw.github.com/fschaefer/Stately.js/master/Stately.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">
    // use Stately
</script>
```

or with Asynchronous Module Definition by e.g.:

```html
<script type="text/javascript" src="https://raw.github.com/jrburke/requirejs/master/require.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">
require(['https://raw.github.com/fschaefer/Stately.js/master/Stately.js'], function (Stately) {
    // use Stately
});
</script>
```

## Usage

### Creating a new machine

A new state machine can be created with either the new operator:

```js
var machine = new Stately(statesObject, initialStateName);
```

or the factory method:

```js
var machine = Stately.machine(statesObject, initialStateName);
```

Both will return a new `stateMachine` object, with all events from all states
attached to it. The machine will transition into the initial state `initialStateName`
 or the first attached `stateObject` if `initialStateName` is omitted. In addition
to the events the `stateMachine` object has a `getMachineState()` method, returning
the current name of the machines state, `getMachineEvents()`, returning possible
events in the current state, and `bind()` and `unbind()` methods, to register
callbacks to receive `notifications` when the machine transitions into another state.

The `statesObject` is an object  with `stateObject` objects attached as
properties.
The property names of the `statesObject` are the `states` of the machine.
The attached `stateObject` objects model the machines states with the property
names as `events` and the connected functions as `actions`:

```js
var machine = Stately.machine({
    'STATE0': {
        event: function () {
            ...
        }
    },
    'STATE1': {
        event: function () {
            ...
        }
    },
    'STATE2':{
        event: function () {
            ...
        },
        anotherEvent: function () {
            ...
        }
    }
});
```

If different states use the same event identifier, the `events` are chained up
and the machine handles calling the correct `action` for the current state (if
the `event` is handled in the current state). If the event is not handled in
the current state, it is ignored.

If no immediate `action` needs to be declared, the desired transition `state`
can be attached to the `event` as string directly:

```js
var machine = Stately.machine({
    'STATE0': {
        'event':        /* => */ 'STATE1'
    },
    'STATE1': {
        'event':        /* => */ 'STATE2'
    },
    'STATE2': {
        'event':        /* => */ 'STATE0',
        'anotherEvent': /* => */ 'STATE1'
    }
});
```

### Transitions

There are several ways an `action` can transition the machine into another
state. The simplest form is returning the desired next state from an action.
Therefore, `this` refers to the (internal) `stateStore` inside an `action` to
access the other states of the machine:

```js
...

'STATE1': {
    doSomething: function () {

        ...

        //transition from STATE1 to STATE2
        return this.STATE2;
        // as an alternative just return the new state as string
        // return 'STATE2';
    }
}

...
```

If an action should not transition the machine into another state, just omit
the return value (or return the current state).

Sometimes it is desired to return a value from an action. In this case the
return value must be an array with two elements. The first element is the next
state the machine should transition into, and the second element the return
value:

```js
...

'STATE1': {
    doSomething: function () {

        ...

        //transition from STATE1 to STATE2 and return a string
        return [this.STATE2, 'this is a return value'];
    }
}

...
```

For asynchronous actions there are `getMachineState()` and
`setMachineState(nextState)` accessible through the `this` reference of an
action:

```js
...

'STATE1': {
    doSomething: function () {
        var self = this;

        setTimeout(function () {

            ...

            self.setMachineState(self.STATE2);
        }, 5000);

        ...

    }
}

...
```

Because `this` refers to the `stateStore`, it is also possible to call an
action from another state (note: this won't trigger the `notification`
callbacks):

```js
...

'STATE1': {
    doSomething: function () {

        ...

        this.STATE2.doSomethingDifferent.call(this);

        ...

        return this.STATE3.doSomethingCompletelyDifferent.call(this);
    }
}

...
```

### Notifications

Once in a while, it is useful to get a `notification` when the machine
transitions into another state. Therefore the `stateMachine` object has
`bind(callback)` and `unbind(callback)` to register and unregister notification
handlers that get called when the state changes. A notification callback has
the following form:

```js
function notification (event, oldState, newState) {
    ...
}
```

`event` - The event that triggered the transition.
`oldState` - The old state the machine is transitioned from.
`newState` - The new state the machine is transitioned into.

Inside the `notification`, `this` refers to the internal `stateStore`.

### Hooks

Beside the notification system via `bind` and `unbind`, there is an alternative
way to attach hooks that are triggered when the state of the machine changes.
Possible hooks are `onbeforeSTATE`, `onenterSTATE` (or as shortcut `onSTATE`)
and `onleaveSTATE` for states and `onbeforeEVENT` and `onafterEVENT` for
events. Hook functions have the same signature as notifications bound with
`bind`.

## Examples

### Door

```js
var door = Stately.machine({
    'OPEN': {
        'close':  /* => */ 'CLOSED'
    },
    'CLOSED': {
        'open':   /* => */ 'OPEN',
        'lock':   /* => */ 'LOCKED'
    },
    'LOCKED': {
        'unlock': /* => */ 'CLOSED',
        'break':  /* => */ 'BROKEN'
    },
    'BROKEN': {
        'fix': function () {
            this.fixed = (this.fixed === undefined ? 1 : ++this.fixed);
            return this.fixed < 3 ? this.OPEN : this.BROKEN;
        }
    }
});

//the initial state of the door is open (it's the first state object)
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'OPEN');        // true;

//close and lock the door
door.close().lock();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'LOCKED');      // true;

//try to open it
door.open();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'OPEN');        // false;

//unlock, open, lock (is ignored because it fails), close, and lock
door.unlock().open().lock().close().lock();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'LOCKED');      // true;

//the door is still locked, break it
door.break();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'BROKEN');      // true;

//fix opens the door, close it, lock it, break it again
door.fix().close().lock().break();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'BROKEN');      // true;

//and again fix opens the door, close it, lock it, break it
door.fix().close().lock().break();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'BROKEN');      // true;

//fixing is limited, the door stays broken
door.fix();
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'OPEN');        // false;
console.log(door.getMachineState() === 'BROKEN');      // true;
```

### Radio

```js
var radio = Stately.machine({
    'STOPPED': {
        play: function () {
            return this.PLAYING;
        }
    },
    'PLAYING': {
        stop: function () {
            return this.STOPPED;
        },
        pause: function () {
            return this.PAUSED;
        }
    },
    'PAUSED': {
        play: function () {
            return this.PLAYING;
        },
        stop: function () {
            return this.STOPPED;
        }
    }
}).bind(function (event, oldState, newState) {

    var transition = oldState + ' => ' + newState;

    switch (transition) {
        /*
        ...
        case 'STOPPED => PLAYING':
        case 'PLAYING => PAUSED':
        ...
        */
        default:
            console.log(transition);
            break;
    }
});

radio.play().pause().play().pause().stop();
//STOPPED => PLAYING
//PLAYING => PAUSED
//PAUSED => PLAYING
//PLAYING => PAUSED
//PAUSED => STOPPED
```

### Radio (more declarative)

```js
var radio = Stately.machine({
    'STOPPED': {
        'play': /* => */ 'PLAYING'
    },
    'PLAYING': {
        'stop':  /* => */ 'STOPPED',
        'pause': /* => */ 'PAUSED'
    },
    'PAUSED': {
        'play': /* => */ 'PLAYING',
        'stop': /* => */ 'STOPPED'
    }
});

radio.onleaveSTOPPED = function (event, oldState, newState) {
    // ...
};

radio.onenterSTOPPED = function (event, oldState, newState) {
    // ...
};

radio.onPLAYING = function (event, oldState, newState) {
    // ...
};

radio.onPAUSED = function (event, oldState, newState) {
    // ...
};
```

## jsFiddles
* http://jsfiddle.net/sz2hG/
